Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about carbon removal.
It’s a story about climate
change, technology, chemistry,
economics and market dynamics,
and the future of the planet.
It is also, although you
might not know it, about you.
A tiny proportion of the world’s
population has contributed to
global carbon removal, but you, if
you are listening to this episode,
are in that special category.
Don’t worry, I will explain it all
in a few minutes, so let’s get right
into it and talk about carbon removal.
Spending too much time reading articles
in the newspaper about climate change
can quickly make you pretty depressed.
Week after week, month after month, year
after year, there are scientists warning
us that the planet is heading for a
climate catastrophe, and despite every
congress, conference, or global agreement
promising to do everything to reduce
carbon emissions, overall, we as a planet,
as a species, keep on missing our goals.
Most recently, in the 2016 Paris
Agreement, 195 countries pledged to
make sure that the global temperature
is no more than 2°C higher than
pre-industrial levels, and “preferably”,
it should be kept below 1.5°C higher.
Last year, in 2024, the average
temperature was more than 1.5°C above
pre-industrial levels, meaning that just
8 years after this supposedly landmark
global agreement was signed, we have
already missed one of the targets.
And, at the risk of sounding even
more glum and gloomy, scientists
are almost unanimous in their
conclusion that it is getting worse.
According to one article last year,
a rise of 1.6°C is the absolute
best we can hope for, and this would
still require vast behavioural and
structural changes in our society.
And while many developed countries
have done a pretty good job at reducing
their emissions, many developing
countries are still at the very early
stages of their “carbon journey”.
China produces more CO2 than all of Europe
and the USA combined, and its rate of
CO2 emissions shows no sign of slowing.
Even on a per capita basis, the
average person in China emits 90%
more CO2 than someone in the UK.
And yes, there is the perfectly reasonable
comeback to this that this isn’t personal
consumption, but taking into account CO2
production from manufacturing and so on.
So, for every person feeling smug about
their “zero emission” electric car in
London or Paris or Madrid, there might
not be black smoke coming out of your
exhaust pipe, but producing that car did
result in lots of CO2 emissions, they just
happened on the other side of the world.
But without getting into the intricacies
of who is responsible for carbon
emissions or trying to point fingers
at individuals or countries, climate
change is a fundamentally global problem.
It knows no borders; it affects
everyone, albeit in different ways.
And while, at least in most of the
media, the attention has been focussed
on reducing carbon emissions–of flying
less, of eating less meat, of living
as sustainably as possible–there is
a flip side, another important part
of reducing the amount of carbon in
the atmosphere and therefore reducing
the rise of global temperatures.
And that is to remove the carbon that has
already been released into the atmosphere.
At the risk of sounding like a
school geography teacher, I want
to pause briefly to address a
few basic but important points.
The planet has a natural carbon cycle.
Carbon moves through the land, the oceans,
the air, and every living thing on Earth,
and it has done so for millions of years.
Plants and trees absorb carbon
dioxide from the air and store it in
their leaves, roots, and the soil.
Tiny marine organisms, like plankton, also
take in carbon dioxide from the water.
Some carbon is also released naturally.
For example, when a volcano erupts, it
sends carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Burning wood does the same.
And animals, including us,
good old humans, we emit carbon
dioxide when we breathe out.
When we die, the carbon in our bodies
is also returned to the environment.
And for a long time, this
carbon cycle was in balance.
The amount of carbon dioxide released
into the atmosphere was more or
less equal to the amount that was
absorbed by plants, oceans, and soil.
But starting around the time of
the Industrial Revolution, we began
burning fossil fuels — coal, oil,
and natural gas — and we did so
and still do so on a massive scale.
This, as you know, releases
huge amounts of extra carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere.
We began emitting more CO2
than the Earth could absorb.
And almost every year since
then, the amount has increased.
So now, almost 200 years later,
there are more than 3,000 gigatons
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
A gigaton is a billion metric tonnes.
And if 3,000 billion tonnes of an
invisible gas is hard to imagine,
the key point is this: it’s an
increase of 50% compared to the
start of the Industrial Revolution.
And this carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere acts like a kind
of blanket around the Earth.
It traps heat from the sun, which
causes global temperatures to rise.
Clearly, that is a gross
simplification, but it helps bring
us to the next point, which is this.
Given that there is all of this carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, and carbon
dioxide causes global heating, and global
heating is bad, what would happen if
we could “remove” the carbon dioxide?
This is the principle behind
carbon removal: to work on removing
carbon dioxide from the planet.
So, what's happening?
What does carbon removal actually involve?
And how does one go about removing
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere?
Well, the good news is
that we know how to do it.
The bad news is that it’s hard, expensive,
and still in its very early stages.
Broadly speaking, carbon removal
technologies aim to do exactly what
trees and oceans do naturally: take in
carbon dioxide and store it somewhere
safe and out of the atmosphere.
Some approaches aim to speed up natural
processes like mineral weathering,
where rocks slowly react with carbon
dioxide and trap it in solid form.
Others are more technological;
machines that literally suck
carbon dioxide directly out of
the air and store it underground.
Some store carbon in soil or plants,
others inject it into rock formations,
and a few even store it in the ocean.
One of the most talked-about is something
called direct air capture, where large
machines act like giant air filters,
pulling in huge volumes of air and using
chemical processes to extract the CO2.
Once it’s captured, the carbon is
compressed and injected deep underground,
where it can stay for thousands of years.
Then there’s this thing called enhanced
weathering, where crushed rocks are
spread onto farmland or coastlines.
These rocks naturally react with
carbon dioxide in the air or water,
forming stable compounds that
are eventually washed into the
ocean and stored as bicarbonate.
Another promising method is something
called biomass carbon removal and storage.
This includes things like burning plant
waste to generate energy, capturing the
carbon that’s released, and storing it
underground, essentially closing the loop.
There are other approaches too: turning
biomass into bio-oil and injecting it
underground, using chemical processes
in the ocean to increase its carbon
absorption, or even sinking agricultural
waste to the bottom of oxygen-poor
seas, where it breaks down very slowly
and locks away carbon in sediment.
It all sounds promising in theory,
and even in practice, most of these
technologies work pretty well.
But there is a problem.
They are still expensive, and as of
now, they haven’t been deployed anywhere
close to the scale that is required.
To remove just 1% of global annual
emissions, we’d need to capture around
400 million tonnes of CO₂ per year.
Today, the total removed by these
carbon removal technologies is only
about 2 million tonnes — that’s
just 0.005% of global emissions.
In other words, we’re only half
a percent of the way to just 1%.
And carbon removal is a classic
victim of the chicken and egg problem.
Because there aren’t many customers,
the cost of carbon removal is still
very high, often many hundreds
of dollars per tonne of CO2.
And because the cost is high,
there aren’t many customers.
In other words, it’s hard to lower the
cost without customers, but hard to
get customers when the cost is so high
But history is full of examples
where this cycle was broken.
The first computers were
massive and cost millions.
The first hard drives could store
a few megabytes but cost a fortune.
Vaccines, solar panels,
smartphones–they all started out
very expensive, slow, and niche.
But as technology improved and demand
grew, prices fell dramatically.
In the case of solar panels,
the cost has fallen by 99.6%
since they were first developed.
A similar thing could happen with
carbon removal, but it needs investment.
These technologies and companies
need customers to buy from them, so
they can invest and improve their
technology and methods, so they can
bring costs down and be more efficient,
so there are more customers, and so on.
And that’s where you come in.
You might not have noticed this, but
we have a little thing on our website
and on receipts which says, “Leonardo
English contributes 1% of your purchase
to remove CO2 from the atmosphere”.
This doesn’t pay for me to buy a train
ticket to scatter crushed rocks on a beach
or to go and plant trees in a forest.
The payment processor that
we use is called Stripe.
It’s one of the biggest payment
processors in the world, and
it has quite a cool non-profit
initiative called Stripe Climate.
You can literally just switch on a
setting and divert a percentage of
all payments towards this initiative.
Yes, it’s small, and this is a tiny
business in the grand scheme of
things, but it's better than nothing.
So I wanted to tell you a little bit
about this initiative, firstly because
I think it's very cool and potentially
important, and secondly because as
a member, you have supported it,
even if you might not have known it.
Stripe Climate operates under an umbrella
called Frontier, which is something called
an “Advance Market Commitment” and is
a big project between Stripe, Alphabet
[which is the company behind Google], Meta
[which is the company behind Facebook] and
a few other large technology companies.
The idea behind this initiative is to
solve this “chicken and egg” problem.
It brings together large companies
that can guarantee that they will
buy carbon removal technologies from
promising companies so that they
can invest in building and scaling
their technologies now, rather
than waiting for other customers to
arrive, which might never happen.
And they are backing some pretty
cool projects, so I wanted to tell
you about a few of them that your
support has helped make possible.
Firstly, there’s one called Eion,
which is a company that works
with farmers to mix a specially
developed silicate rock into soil.
This rock reacts with carbon
dioxide in the air and eventually
turns it into a stable form of
carbon that ends up in the ocean.
It’s a natural process, but Eion is
speeding it up, and they’re also helping
improve soil quality at the same time.
Another one is called Phlair, which uses
a process called electrochemical pH-swing.
It might sound technical, but essentially,
it captures carbon dioxide from the air
using a chemical solvent, then permanently
stores the carbon in construction
materials, like bricks or concrete,
so it never returns to the atmosphere.
Then there’s one with the
ominous name of Vaulted Deep.
Maybe it sounds like a horror film, or
someone’s gaming name, but it's a company
that basically buries food underground.
Obviously, it’s a little
more complicated than this.
It takes organic waste, things
like food scraps and agricultural
leftovers, and injects it deep
underground in specially built wells.
As it decomposes, the
carbon stays locked away.
Not only does this stop carbon from
entering the atmosphere, but it solves
the problem of environmental waste, and it
doesn’t require fancy new infrastructure.
And finally, there’s a project
close to home, at least where I am.
There’s a Swedish company called Exergi,
and it’s another nice example of how
this technology sometimes seems obvious.
What it is doing is retrofitting a
biomass power plant in Stockholm.
This biomass power plant already takes
waste products from the timber industry,
such as sawdust, branches, and wood,
then burns them to generate electricity
for people living in Stockholm.
But what this company is doing is
adapting the power plant so that the
CO2 generated during this process is
captured before it’s released into
the atmosphere, then transporting it
away and burying it deep underground.
It’s a nice example because it is a
mixture between carbon removal and
emission reduction, and also shows
how these technologies aren’t always
rocket science; they just need enough
people to believe in them so they can be
scaled and deployed on a global basis.
And these are just a few of the dozens
of companies working on this challenge.
I’ll put a link in the description to
the Stripe Climate website, so you can
go and check out some of these companies
if you are interested; there are some
really cool ideas and projects in there.
Some will fail, some will succeed,
and there’s a real challenge
in verifying and monitoring how
much carbon is truly removed.
But all of them are helping build
the foundations for what might one
day be a massive global industry.
So, can carbon removal save the planet?
No, not by itself.
But alongside reducing emissions,
switching to clean energy, protecting
forests, and changing how we live
and work, it’s one of the tools
we’ll need to have a fighting chance.
And thanks to you, one of the relatively
few people on this planet who has helped
fund real carbon removal, that future
perhaps looks just a tiny bit brighter.
OK then, that is it for carbon
removal, this fascinating and
vastly important technology.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Firstly, did you notice that little
piece of text about “removing
CO2” when you became a member?
I imagine most people don’t notice it, or
if they do, they are a bit confused about
what it means, but I’d be curious to know.
And secondly, how does knowing about
these kinds of technologies make you feel?
Excited, nervous for the future,
or perhaps that it’s a distraction
from the bigger problem of reducing
our emissions in the first place?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.